Welcome to the ``tell`` Quickstarter!
=====================================

**``tell`` is an open-source Python package for projecting future electricty demand in the United States.**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A little about ``tell``
-----------------------

The Total ELectricity Load (TELL) model projects the short- and
long-term evoluation of hourly electricity demand (load) in response to
future changes in weather and climate. The purpose of ``tell`` is to
generate end-of-century hourly profiles of electricity demand across the
entire Conterminous United States (CONUS) at a spatial resolution
adequate for input to a unit commitment/economic dispatch (UC/ED) model
while also maintaining consistency with the long-term growth and
evolution of annual state-level electricity demand projected by an
economically driven human-Earth system model. ``tell`` takes as input
future projections of the hourly time-series of meteorology and decadal
populations and uses the temporal variations in weather to project
hourly profiles of total electricity demand. The core predictions in
``tell`` are based on a series of multilayer perceptron (MLP) models for
individual Balancing Authorities (BAs). Those MLP models are trained on
historical observations of weather and electricity demand. Hourly
projections from ``tell`` are scaled to match the annual state-level
total electricity loads projected by the U.S. version of the Global
Change Analysis Model (GCAM-USA). GCAM-USA captures the long-term
co-evolution of the human-Earth system. Using this unique approach
allows ``tell`` to reflect both changes in the shape of the load profile
due to variations in weather and the long-term evolution of energy
demand due to changes in population, technology, and economics. ``tell``
is unique from other load forecasting models in that it features an
explicit spatial component that allows us to relate projected loads to
where they would occur spatially within a grid operations model. The
output of ``tell`` is a series of hourly projections for future
electricity demand at the county, state, and BA scale that are
quantitatively and conceptually consistent with one another. More
information about how the model works and how it can be applied are
available on the `Read the
Docs <https://immm-sfa.github.io/tell/index.html>`__ site for ``tell``.

Lets get started!
-----------------

In this quickstarter we will walk through a series of steps for
exploring ``tell``, starting with importing the package and ending with
visualizing the output. This quickstarter is based on a subset of
example forcing data for ``tell``. This allows the user to walk through
the entire ``tell`` package in a matter of minutes. For the
visualizations throughout this notebook, the user can choose whether or
not to save these plots by setting the ``save_images`` and
``image_resolution`` flags in each function.

1. Install ``tell``
-------------------

``tell`` is available via GitHub repository by using the pip install
functionality.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Start by importing the TELL package and information about your operating system:
    import os 
    import tell


2. Install the package of data underpinning ``tell``
----------------------------------------------------

``tell`` is based on open-source publicly accessible data. For
convienence, we’ve packaged all of the data underpinning the ``tell``
quickstarter notebook into a `Zenodo data
package <https://zenodo.org/record/6578641#.Yo1R7ZPMJTY>`__. In order to
run this notebook, first set the local directory where you would like to
store the package data and the run the ``install_quickstarter_data``
function below. Note that the quickstarter data package will require
~650 MB of storage and can take several minutes to download. You will
also need a dataset with sample forcing data for ``tell``, also
available in a `Zenodo data
package <https://zenodo.org/record/6354665#.Yi-_PRDMJTY>`__. The sample
forcing data package will require ~250 MB of storage.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Identify the current working directory, the subdirectory where the data will be stored, and the image output subdirectory:
    current_dir =  os.path.join(os.path.dirname(os.getcwd()))
    tell_data_dir = os.path.join(current_dir, r'tell_data')
    tell_image_dir = os.path.join(tell_data_dir, r'visualizations')
    
    # If the "tell_data_dir" subdirectory doesn't exist then create it:
    if not os.path.exists(tell_data_dir):
       os.makedirs(tell_data_dir)
    
    # If the "tell_image_dir" subdirectory doesn't exist then create it:
    if not os.path.exists(tell_image_dir):
       os.makedirs(tell_image_dir)


.. code:: ipython3

    # Download the TELL quickstarter data package from Zenodo:
    tell.install_quickstarter_data(data_dir = tell_data_dir)


.. code:: ipython3

    # Download the TELL sample forcing data package from Zenodo:
    tell.install_sample_forcing_data(data_dir = tell_data_dir)


3. MLP model training and projection
------------------------------------

This section of the notebook takes the data processed in the
``tell_data_preprocessing.ipynb`` notebook and trains a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) model for each of the 54 BAs in ``tell``. The MLP
models use temporal variations in weather to project hourly demand. More
information about this approach is in the MLP section of the ``tell``
`User Guide <https://immm-sfa.github.io/tell/user_guide.html>`__. We
include pre-trained models within the ``tell`` repository. If you want
to explore the model training aspect you can use the code in Section 3.1
to retrain the MLP models for a single BA or a batch of BAs. Note that
since the ``save_model`` parameter is set to false by default running
these training steps will not overwrite the models included in ``tell``.
If you want to skip this step you can move to Section 3.2 to see how
``tell`` projects future loads by BA using weather projections.

3.1. MLP training
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first step is to train the MLP models using the historical weather
and load datasets. The default settings for the MLP model training steps
are included in the ``mlp_settings.yml`` file included in the data
folder of the ``tell`` repository. By default the MLP models are trained
on data from 2016-2018 and evaluated using data from 2019. The time
windows for training and evaluating the models can be modified by
altering the ``start_time``, ``end_time``, and ``split_datetime``
parameters when calling the ``tell.train`` function. The first code
block shows how to train the MLP models for a single BA. We also include
a function to do some basic analysis of the trained model’s performance.
More extensive evaluation of the ``tell`` predictive models is included
in the ``tell_mlp_calibration_evaluation.ipynb`` notebook.

.. code:: ipython3

    # For more information about the training of predictive models you can call the help function:
    help(tell.train)


.. code:: ipython3

    # Run the MLP training step for a single BA (i.e., "region"):
    prediction_df, validation_df = tell.train(region = 'PJM',
                                              data_dir = os.path.join(tell_data_dir, r'tell_quickstarter_data', r'outputs', r'compiled_historical_data'))
    
    # View the head of the prediction dataframe that contains the time-series of projected load in the evaluation year:
    display(prediction_df.head(10))
    
    # View validation dataframe that contains error statistics for the trained model:
    validation_df


You can also train multiple BAs at the same time using parallel
processing. The example code block below retrains the models for all BAs
in ``tell``.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Generate a list of BA abbreviations to process:
    ba_abbrev_list = tell.get_balancing_authority_to_model_dict().keys()
    
    # Run the MLP training step for the list of BAs using parallel processing streams:
    prediction_df, validation_df = tell.train_batch(target_region_list = ba_abbrev_list,
                                                    data_dir = os.path.join(tell_data_dir, r'tell_quickstarter_data', r'outputs', r'compiled_historical_data'),
                                                    n_jobs = -1)
    
    # View the validation dataframe that contains error statistics for the trained models:
    validation_df


.. code:: ipython3

    # Plot the statistical performance (e.g., RMS_ABS, RMS_NORM, MAPE, or R2) of the predictive models across all the BAs in TELL:
    tell.plot_mlp_summary_statistics(validation_df, 
                                     image_output_dir = tell_image_dir,
                                     image_resolution = 150,
                                     save_images = True)


3.2. MLP model projection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next we use the trained MLP models to project future loads in each BA
using the sample forcing data downloaded in Section 2. The outcomes of
this projection step are then used in the forward execution of ``tell``
in Section 4. The sample forcing data includes four years of future
meteorology for each BA: 2039, 2059, 2079, and 2099. Those are the only
valid options for the ``year`` variable when calling the prediciton
functions.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Run the MLP prediction step for a single BA (i.e., "region"):
    pdf = tell.predict(region = 'ERCO',
                       year = 2039,
                       data_dir = os.path.join(tell_data_dir, r'sample_forcing_data', r'future_weather', r'rcp85hotter_ssp5'),
                       datetime_field_name = 'Time_UTC',
                       save_prediction = True,
                       prediction_output_directory = os.path.join(tell_data_dir, r'tell_quickstarter_data', r'outputs', r'mlp_output', r'rcp85hotter_ssp5'))
    
    # View the prediction dataframe:
    pdf


.. code:: ipython3

    # Generate a list of BA abbreviations to process:
    ba_abbrev_list = tell.get_balancing_authority_to_model_dict().keys()
    
    # Run the MLP prediction step for the list of BAs using parallel processing streams:
    pdf = tell.predict_batch(target_region_list = ba_abbrev_list,
                             year = 2039,
                             data_dir = os.path.join(tell_data_dir, r'sample_forcing_data', r'future_weather', r'rcp85hotter_ssp5'),
                             datetime_field_name = 'Time_UTC',
                             save_prediction = True,
                             prediction_output_directory = os.path.join(tell_data_dir, r'tell_quickstarter_data', r'outputs', r'mlp_output', r'rcp85hotter_ssp5'),
                             n_jobs = -1)
    
    # View the prediction dataframe:
    pdf


4. Model forward execution
--------------------------

This section of the ``tell`` workflow takes the .csv files produced by
the ``tell`` MLP models and distributes the projected load to the
counties that each BA operates in. The county-level hourly loads are
then summed to the state-level and scaled to match the state-level
annual loads produced by GCAM-USA. Four sets of output files are
generated: county-level hourly loads, state-level hourly loads, hourly
loads for each BA, and a summary file that includes state-level annual
loads from TELL and GCAM-USA as well as the scaling factors. Note that
since it takes a while to write out the county-level output data this
output is optional. To output county-level load projections just set the
``save_county_data`` flag to true.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Run the TELL model forward in time for a given year:
    summary_df, ba_time_series_df, state_time_series_df = tell.execute_forward(year_to_process = '2039',
                                                                               scenario_to_process = 'rcp85hotter_ssp5',
                                                                               data_input_dir = tell_data_dir,
                                                                               save_county_data = False)


5. Model visualization
----------------------

The final section of this quickstarter notebook plots some of the output
of ``tell`` to give the user a flavor of what the model is doing. Note
that the sample output data in the ``tell`` quickstarter covers the
years 2039, 2059, 2079, and 2099 so those are the only valid values for
the ``year_to_plot`` variable in each function call.

5.1. Plot a map of the state scaling factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first visualization plots the state level scaling factors that force
the annual total loads projected by ``tell`` at the state-level to agree
with those from GCAM-USA. Values closer to 1 indicate that the models
are in closer agreement. In this case using the sample output (which
relies on a generic GCAM-USA simulation) means you shouldn’t read too
much into disagreements between the two models.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Plot the state-level scaling factors:
    tell.plot_state_scaling_factors(year_to_plot = '2039', 
                                    scenario_to_plot = 'rcp85hotter_ssp5',  
                                    data_input_dir = tell_data_dir, 
                                    image_output_dir = tell_image_dir,
                                    image_resolution = 150,
                                    save_images = True)


5.2. Plot the state annual total loads from GCAM-USA and ``tell``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next we plot the annual total loads from both GCAM-USA and ``tell``. The
data plotted here are in units of TWh and the ``tell`` values are the
unscaled projections. The scaled projections ``tell`` are by definition
equal to those from GCAM-USA.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Plot the annual total loads from both GCAM-USA and TELL:
    tell.plot_state_annual_total_loads(year_to_plot = '2039',
                                       scenario_to_plot = 'rcp85hotter_ssp5',  
                                       data_input_dir = tell_data_dir,
                                       image_output_dir = tell_image_dir,
                                       image_resolution = 150,
                                       save_images = True)


5.3. Plot the time-series of total hourly loads for a given state
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here we plot time-series of the raw (unscaled) and scaled total loads
from ``tell`` at the state level. The user specifies which state they
want to plot using the \`state_to_plot” variable in the function call.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Plot the time-series of raw and scaled loads from TELL at the state level for a user-specified state:
    tell.plot_state_load_time_series(state_to_plot = 'Connecticut', 
                                     year_to_plot = '2039',
                                     scenario_to_plot = 'rcp85hotter_ssp5', 
                                     data_input_dir = tell_data_dir,
                                     image_output_dir = tell_image_dir,
                                     image_resolution = 150,
                                     save_images = True)


5.4. Plot the load duration curve for a given state
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Our last plot at the state level is the load duration curve which shows
the frequency at which a given load occurs in a state. The user
specifies which state they want to plot using the “state_to_plot”
variable in the function call.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Plot the load duration curve at the state level for a user-specified state:
    tell.plot_state_load_duration_curve(state_to_plot = 'North Carolina', 
                                        year_to_plot = '2039',
                                        scenario_to_plot = 'rcp85hotter_ssp5', 
                                        data_input_dir = tell_data_dir,
                                        image_output_dir = tell_image_dir,
                                        image_resolution = 150,
                                        save_images = True)


5.5. Plot the time-series of total hourly loads for a given BA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Our final visualization plots the time-series of the raw (unscaled) and
scaled total loads from ``tell`` at the BA level. The user specifies
which BA they want to plot using the “ba_to_plot” variable in the
function call.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Plot the time-series of raw and scaled loads from TELL at the BA level for a user-specified BA (e.g., PJM, CISO, ERCO, etc.):
    tell.plot_ba_load_time_series(ba_to_plot = 'NYIS', 
                                  year_to_plot = '2039',
                                  scenario_to_plot = 'rcp85hotter_ssp5', 
                                  data_input_dir = tell_data_dir,
                                  image_output_dir = tell_image_dir,
                                  image_resolution = 150,
                                  save_images = True)


